## A Ghost Story

> Excerpted from Pliny the Younger's letter to Sura (7.27). English from Latin.

There was in Athens a house that was large and spacious but infamous for
being haunted. In the silence of the night, the sound of iron and, if
you listened closely, the clanking of chains could be heard, distant at
first then drawing nearer. Then there would appear a specter of a lean
and filty old man with a flowing beard and hair standing on end, with
shackles on his legs and shaking the chains on his arms.

Thus the sorrowful inhabitants remained awake through the night with
fear and their wakefulness led to sickness and, as their terror
increased, death. For even by day, although the specter had withdrawn,
its memory stayed in their mind's eye such that fear remained even
though its cause had gone. The house was thus deserted and left entirely
to the specter, yet was advertised for purchase or rent in case someone
unaware of its great evil was found.

There came to Athens the philosopher Athenodorus, who read the notice
and took note of the price. He was supicious of its cheapness but after
being told everything was all the more interested in renting.

When it began to grow dark, he requested bedding to be laid out in the
front part of the house and asked for writing tablets, a stylus, and a
lamp. He then sent his attendants away into the house and concentrated
his mind, eyes, and hand on his writings so that his mind would not be
empty and imagine the phantom he had heard about or other foolish fears.

At first there was only the silence of the night, then came the sounds
of iron being struck and chains being moved. He did not raise his eyes
or set down his stylus, but steeled his mind and ears to shut out the
sound. Then the noise became louder and closer and was heard first
entering the doorway then from within in the room. He looked up and
recognized the spirit as described to him.

It stood and beckoned with its finger as if summoning him. He signed to
it to wait a moment and returned to leaning over his stylus and
writings. It rattled its chains over his head as he wrote. He looked up
again and it beckoned as before, so without delay he picked up his lamp
and followed. It moved with slow steps, burdened by chains. When it
turned into the courtyard of the house, it suddenly dispersed and left
him alone. He tore up some grass and plants and placed them to mark the
spot.

The following day he approached the magistrate and advised that he order
the marked spot to be dug up. They found buried bones wrapped in chains,
which when time and the earth had caused the body to decay were left
bare and empty. The bones were collected and buried properly, and after
the burial rites the house was free from spirits.